Added compliance testing page and references (#191)
tewhatuora/api-standards: docs/api-publishing/08-ComplianceTesting.md

---
title: Compliance Testing
---

## What is Compliance Testing 

Compliance testing is a software testing that checks whether an API Consumer's system, product, or software application, adheres to specified standards, protocols, or regulations. Compliance testing helps to validate that an API Consumer application aligns with a predetermined set of rules and guidelines imposed by API Provider, enhancing overall quality, eligibility, reliability, and interoperability. 

## Purpose 

The goal of compliance testing is to ensure that the API consumer application meets the compliance requirements, technical specifications, and legal regulations imposed by API Provider. 

### Key Benefits of Compliance Testing: 

**Legal and regulatory adherence**: Ensures that the product or system complies with laws and regulations to avoid legal penalties. 

> **API Provider and API Consumer confidence**: Demonstrates that API consumption meets compliance requirements, which can help build confidence with API Providers, API Consumers and stakeholders.

Author: Made changes. Pls review.

**Risk mitigation**: Identifies risks and vulnerabilities early in the development process, minimising the chances of security breaches, data leaks, privacy violations, or regulatory issues. 

**Improved quality**: Enhances the overall services quality, security, and performance; improves data quality and data integrity by embedding the quality requirements into design and assurance process.

## Key Considerations of Compliance Testing
API Provide **SHOULD** take the following key considerations during the design of the compliance test:

- Align Compliance Testing to business use cases, ensuring the process is easy to adopt 

- Provide clear instructions and criteria (e.g. using [Gherkin syntax](https://cucumber.io/docs/gherkin/reference/)) 

> - Provide information of mandatory tests and conditions (e.g. a test is only required to complete if API Consumer has permission to view a patient's contact details)

Author: Not sure about this one. This covers the conditional requirements of compliance testing. Here is an example: 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e524681f-762e-4260-949c-279c44f3f090)

> - Provide information of mandatory tests and conditions (e.g. a test is only required to complete if API Consumer has permission to view a patient's contact details)

Reviewer: agree

    - **I**dentity - For example, API Consumer uses MFA to authenticate service users 
    - **C**linical Safety - For example, the Patient immunisation information must be displayed in full regardless the screen resolution
    - **E**quity - For example, 

- Tests should reflect real life scenarios

- Automate testing where it can

- Tests can be extended with additional tests with incremental development 

- Tests are reliable, repeatable, and traceable

- Edge cases are considered (e.g. long names of patients, medicines, etc.) 

- Remediation path is provided for test failure  

- Recertification process is defined for periodic compliance testing and change of compliance status 

- Provide examples and environment to demonstrate compliance (e.g. a compliance demo)

- Provide test report or summary template  

- Consider alternative or innovative tools to ease the compliance testing process, e.g. recorded demo, automation, report generation, etc. 

## Compliance testing process 

*API Provider* **MUST** provide compliant testing process definition. Diagrams **SHOULD** be used that describe an API Consumer compliance testing journey. 
 

> The process of compliance testing involves several steps to verify that the system meets the required compliance. Below is how a typical compliance test process looks like:

Reviewer: Can you update the diagram to be clear on who is doing what? i.e. API consumer tasks vs provider tasks.

Author: Added actors. Pls review.

1. Execute Tests 
    - Run compliance tests
    - Use a combination of automated and manual tests but automate when possible

1. Record Test Outcomes
    - Document the results of each test case against the compliance criteria. 

1. Evaluate Test Results 
    - Review and assess the test result
    - Identify gaps or issues: document the non-compliant areas if any and analyse the root cause. 
    - Generate reports: Summarise compliance status, any failures, and suggestions for remediation. 

1. Remediation (if necessary)
    - Fix the identified non-compliance issues 
    - Re-test after corrections: After fixes have been implemented, re-run the necessary tests to ensure compliance. 

    - Iterate until compliance is achieved: Repeat the process of fixing and testing until all compliance requirements are met. 

1. Ongoing Compliance Monitoring (if necessary)
    API Provider can require continuous monitoring or periodic reassessment to ensure ongoing compliance. When compliance requirements are changed, ensure that the API Consumer undergoes updated compliance testing.

## Examples 

- Get Match And Validate Patient Compliance Testing

>     https://master.d3b08qop7whnnl.amplifyapp.com/GetMatchAndValidatePatientComplianceTesting.html 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
https://nhi-ig.hip.digital.health.nz/GetMatchAndValidatePatientComplianceTesting.html
```

        >
        >Then the macron characters should render properly across all supported devices and platforms

- Tests should reflect real life scenarios including edge cases (e.g. long names of patients) and data quality issues (e.g. non-compliant historical data or missing information.

- Provide a mechanism to automate testing where possible

- Tests can be extended with additional tests with incremental development 

- Tests are reliable, repeatable, and traceable

- Edge cases are considered (e.g. long names of patients, medicines, etc.) 

- Remediation path is provided for test failure  

- Recertification process is defined for periodic compliance testing and change of compliance status 

- Provide examples and environment to demonstrate compliance (e.g. a compliance demo)

- Provide test report or summary template  

- Consider alternative or innovative tools to ease the compliance testing process, e.g. recorded demo, automation, report generation, etc. 

## Compliance testing process 

API Provider **MUST** provide compliant testing process definition. Diagrams **SHOULD** be used that describe an API Consumer compliance testing journey. 
 

> The process of compliance testing involves several steps to verify that the system meets the required compliance. Below is how a typical compliance test process looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process of compliance testing involves several steps to verify that the system meets the required standards. Below is an overview of a typical compliance testing process:
```
minor wording fix

> ```plantuml alt="Example of Compliance Testing Process"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```plantuml alt="Flowchart illustrating the compliance testing process between an API Provider and API Consumer. It begins with the API Consumer identifying test requirements and guidelines, followed by a request for compliance testing. Test planning occurs with the API Provider preparing the test environment, while the API Consumer prepares the tests. The API Consumer then executes the tests and records the outcomes. Results are evaluated, and if necessary, remediation is performed. The cycle repeats until compliance is certified. Once certified, compliance monitoring is conducted by the API Provider and continues while ongoing."
```

Author: Should this be merged into the elaboration below the diagram?

1. Execute Tests 
    - Run compliance tests
    - Use a combination of automated and manual tests but automate when possible

1. Record Test Outcomes
    - Document the results of each test case against the compliance criteria. 

1. Evaluate Test Results 
    - Review and assess the test result
    - Identify gaps or issues: document the non-compliant areas if any and analyse the root cause. 
    - Generate reports: Summarise compliance status, any failures, and suggestions for remediation. 

1. Remediation (if necessary)
    - Fix the identified non-compliance issues 
    - Re-test after corrections: After fixes have been implemented, re-run the necessary tests to ensure compliance. 

    - Iterate until compliance is achieved: Repeat the process of fixing and testing until all compliance requirements are met. 

1. Ongoing Compliance Monitoring (if necessary)
    API Provider can require continuous monitoring or periodic reassessment to ensure ongoing compliance. When compliance requirements are changed, ensure that the API Consumer undergoes updated compliance testing.

> 

Reviewer: Suggest we remove this. Too much detail for a standard.
